Hi everybody, welcome back to the Data Science Hangout. It's so nice to see everybody again.
I'd love to hear what everybody was up to all of July, but it was so awesome to be able
to meet so many of you at the rstudio conference last week too, and being able to put a face
to the name. If you're joining for the first time, I see in the chat already that a few
people are. Welcome to the Hangout. I'm Rachel, and it's great to meet you. If this is your
first Hangout, this is an open space for the whole data science community to connect and
chat about data science leadership, questions you're facing, and what's really going on
in the world of data science. And the sessions are all recorded and shared to the rstudio
YouTube as well as the Data Science Hangout site, so you can always go back and re-watch
or find helpful resources there too. I'll add up here first that we do also have a LinkedIn
group for the Hangout, so if you do ever want to continue a conversation, you can go there
as well. Tyler or Hannah can share it in the chat for me too. Together, we're all here
and dedicated to providing an inclusive and open environment for everyone. We love when
everybody can participate and we can hear from everyone. So there's three ways that
you can ask questions today. If this is your first time, so you can jump in by raising
your hand on Zoom. You can put questions in the Zoom chat, and just put a little star
next to your question if you want me to read it out loud instead. If you're maybe in like
a loud coffee shop or your dog's barking or something. And then third, we also have
a Slido link where you can ask questions anonymously too. And I see Tyler just shared that right
as I said it. Just like to reiterate, we love to hear from everyone, no matter your level
of experience or industry that you work in as well. But today, I'm so excited to be back
with you all and to be joined by my co-host, who I just got to meet in person last week,
Lindsay Dietz, Stress Testing Production Function Lead at the Federal Reserve Bank
of Minneapolis. And Lindsay, I'd love to turn it over to you and have you introduce yourself
and maybe share a little bit about the work that you do.
Sure. Thanks, Rachel. Rachel, I think we actually maybe met in 2020, but I know no one remembers
the time before the pandemic. In San Fran, possibly. But no, really appreciate all of
the help that you've provided in helping to share some of our open postings and all that
in the last year and was great to meet you in person as well, as well as many of the
other folks who've done data science Hangouts over the past year. So I'm Lindsay Dietz.
I am currently essentially a data science quant manager within the Federal Reserve Bank
of Minneapolis. For those of you who aren't familiar with the Federal Reserve System,
although I'm guessing a lot of you have heard things about our chairman, Jay Powell, basically
the Federal Reserve System is 13 separate entities. So there's a board of governors
in Washington, DC, which was nice. I got to see a lot of colleagues at the conference
last week as well. And then there are 12 separate individual reserve banks. So I'm in the one
in Minneapolis, which covers the ninth district. Although the work that I do is very national
in nature, I work on what's called the large bank stress test, which essentially is a way
to see how banks would would do under a severe recessionary situation. So we have a set
of internal models that we use to sort of assess their performance, and look at outcomes
of that test and is published on an annual basis, except for in 2020, which we got to
do it twice. There are two publications from that year, which I'm sure all of you can relate
to having maybe twice as much work in 2020. Even even though things had changed a lot.
So my background is that I have a sort of math stats, upbringing, undergrad, and a little
bit of grad school and then started work in finance, decided that I wanted to be a professor.
So I went back for a PhD in statistics. About halfway through, I realized, you know what
I'm really enjoying the most is sort of the consulting aspects of the work. And that,
you know, I get to apply all these like statistical concepts in different fields. And for me that,
you know, most interesting space was was finance and economics at the time. And so I had some
connections with the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis is a really great fit as sort
of a research institution, but also a place where I could do this kind of applied statistics
work that I was interested in. So I had joined a group that does does something called validation,
which is basically looking at financial models in sort of a way that sort of a journal reviewer
would look at a journal article submitted. Like what, you know, have they met the assumptions
of the methods that they're looking at? Have they implemented things correctly? Are there,
you know, holes sort of in the logic. So I worked in that space for about three years.
And then about three years ago, I switched over to this implementation and analytics
work, which essentially looks like putting our models into code, production quality code,
and then developing analytics to tell stories around the outcomes or the data so that our
policymakers can make good decisions and have, you know, sort of useful economic stories
to tell around the outcomes of the stress testing exercise. So that is a little bit
about myself. Right now I have sort of jointly managing a team of about 12 quants data scientists
that work across all of these different financial models. Our program is about 150 people in total.
So I get to work very cross functionally with a lot of different people with different skill sets.
It's definitely very interesting and in line with the idea of the consulting work that I
really set out to do. That's great. Thanks, Lindsay. As we wait for questions to come in
from everyone, I'm curious, what's something that you're most excited about right now with
regards to data science? Yeah, I think so. As a statistician by training, we can be a little bit
down on the machine learning community, because sometimes we can say like, hey, they can't explain
their results, or their results might be biased in some way. So I'm really very interested in
the movement towards like the explainable ML. While it's not really something I work with
necessarily on a daily basis, I think it's really going to change, you know, I guess, at least the
rigor that we think about going into the data processing and how these, you know, seemingly
kind of innocuous algorithms impact people in disparate ways. And so I have some colleagues
from grad school who do a lot of work in this space and very interested to see where that
part of the field goes. I think there are a lot of, you know, useful crossovers for the statistician
and machine learning community and don't want to be a gatekeeper. So I think I'm very interested to
see where that goes and learn more about it. Awesome. I see a few questions are coming through
on Slido already. And someone had asked, am I understanding correctly that models are used
to forecast unique situations, like a severe recession? And if these are so uncommon,
how is that done? Sure. So I should have maybe given a broader explanation. So essentially,
the Federal Reserve has a group that will develop these scenarios, which basically consists of
several variables. So you can think of things like unemployment rate, or treasury yield curves,
being part of that set of variables. And they project paths for those that sort of emulate
what a severe recession would look like. And then the idea is that we publish those. So those are
published typically around February each year. And then we run our models using those as sort of the
predictor variables that sort of relate to these different financial profiles. And banks do the
same, they have their own internal sets of models that they use as well. So that's how it's done.
We actually do publish what we call a methodology disclosure. Again, that comes out annually,
around the March timeframe. So I can send some links to Rachel after this to share with the
group as well. Yeah, definitely. And I can share those in the LinkedIn group to the summary of the
session. But I see somebody else had asked, Lindsay, do you have any tips for communicating
technical results to non-technical audiences? And by non-technical meaning like non-coding or
non-statistician? Yeah. So I would say it's probably key to think of pretty much every audience as a
non-technical audience. Even when you have people who are technical, it's best not to assume that
they ever know the things that you know, because, you know, it's unlikely that anyone will be as
deeply immersed in a problem as you are. And in some sense, it can almost be worse if you have a
technical person and you're like, well, why don't you understand this? Because then they may, you
know, may feel a little bit hurt by that. But I would say it can be hard. But the biggest thing
is focusing on the impact of the output first. So I like to tell my team that, you know, people,
what you might think is like a smallest piece of work is something that someone else is going to
think is sort of magic. Like, just telling someone earlier today, you know, they're talking about all
the coding stuff they had done. And I'm like, you know, the thing that's going to really impress
people is that you just generated this automated piece of documentation from your code, basically
for free, it took you five minutes. But that's like the magic piece. I remember someone at the
RStudio conference talking about like, minimizing time to magic. And that kind of thing is what
really is like the impact driver for most people. So really focusing on the impact in regular words,
removing the jargon, that kind of thing. And then, you know, trusting yourself that you've done
all the checking, the assumptions, the really technical details, and, you know, writing that
down for yourself and having, you know, maybe a good appendix or technical paper to go with your
work. But really, that is the key, I think, for the non-technical audiences. And then,
sometimes having the, you know, people that are non-technical ask you questions that you just
didn't even think about, that are really very helpful in sort of being proactive in future
analysis. So I would say, look at it as an opportunity to like, practice your translation
skills, even if it's, you know, they're not going to understand your world, you're not necessarily
going to understand theirs. But especially for decision makers, managers, you know, bottom lines
are important, right? How does this, how does this save us time? How does this save us money?
Those are kind of key concepts that I would keep in mind for non-technical spaces.
I love that minimizing time to magic term. And I see Rob and Zach both just said that in the
chat as well. I wish I could give credit to them. Yeah, I wish I could give credit to who said it,
but someone at the conference said that in one of the talks. So I'll try to find that after this too.
That's great. Someone else asked on Slido, how has your work been impacted by this period of
high inflation? Yeah, it's a good question. I will say that my work is not really in the sort
of inflation interest rate space, but we're certainly all thinking about it in the background
about how we should be incorporating this or thinking about the data that we're going to,
we get in from banks when we look at that. Certainly it will change things about the
portfolios that the banks have. You know, they may be taking certain actions because of high
inflation. So that's definitely something that, you know, we're considering, but again, I don't
work specifically on inflation. I think we're trusting that the Federal Open Market Committee
and their tool set will hopefully be able to help us in the long run. But yeah,
leave that to the, mostly the bank presidents and the board of governors to work on. But yeah,
just it's definitely, you know, informing some of our perspectives as we look at the data and
the outcomes of our models. Thank you. I see there's a few questions coming into the chat
as well. Lisa, would you want to jump in and ask that?
Hi, Lindsay. Lindsay and I are just across the river from each other. So yeah, I'm just curious
how you got buy-in at the Fed for using RRStudio, if you were the one to push for those,
if they're already there. And then if you've had any luck getting some,
I don't even like this term, I use less technical people, but maybe people who in the past have used
like a lot of super complicated Excel spreadsheets, for example, to try using R.
Yeah, I think, luckily I didn't have to do too much of the hard work up front, but I think
there were a lot of key kind of decision makers at the beginning who had some affinity for,
actually maybe S+, even like weren't necessarily using R, but, you know, they knew that R was sort
of blooming a little bit at the time from, you know, R has been around for a while. I should
have mentioned, I've been an R user technically probably for 20 years, but really just in the
last five, do I feel like I really fully understand, or not even fully understand,
but fully I'm taking advantage of some of the capacities of R based on, you know,
like what I learned in grad school. It's almost like I didn't learn anything. So I think also it
was like pretty cool to be doing a PhD at the time when like Hadley and Yihui were coming out with all
of these like inventions, you know, sort of like the NIDRR framework and the like reshaped to
dplyr kind of framework. But I think, you know, what was nice about the place that we were in
was it wasn't necessarily people using Excel, but more just like people using other statistical
software packages. And I think for our work, we needed to really centralize and unify,
like, so that we could standardize code and we could all run each other's code.
So we couldn't choose, you know, multiple different languages necessarily to do that.
And I think, you know, we had some smart leaders who sort of saw that open source was a good way
to move. So we use, they chose R and then we also use some Python in our work as well.
Certainly there is still like a continuous spy in work to be done. I think people still,
you know, people are very beholden to the software that they used in grad school or undergrad or,
you know, what they've been using in prior jobs. So convincing. So most people who are using more
of the proprietary software, especially like it's economics, there are really specific
software packages that people enjoy using. But, you know, R is great that it's very approachable.
It has a great, like, it's fairly easy to Google. You can get some really old results if you're not
careful, but part of the learning to Google process. And I think just having all these
communities, like I said, my, a lot of my team was able to go to our studio conference.
You know, there's not necessarily equivalent stuff for some of the other software packages.
And then I think just being open to really teaching people the ropes and that, you know,
it's kind of like being a professor where you just have to stay a little bit ahead of the students.
So like, you know, some of the work to try to turn things into packages within our framework,
I'll go run and do a little bit. And then I've had a lot of success getting our interns to work on,
you know, to sort of front run some of this so that we have a, like a framework to give our team
has been very helpful. But I think, you know, people are pretty open to just using the tools
that make the most sense. And it's, you know, it's nice to have the access to the packages
and all of the code in them, just in case there are things that we need to modify for some reason
for our purposes. And definitely the open source framework makes it a lot easier for us to utilize
a lot of those tools. Great. And I see there's a bunch of questions coming in both Slido and
in the chat. But Zach, I see you asked a question. And also if people feel comfortable
introducing yourselves, I know it's been a long time since, well, a month since we've all been
together. But Zach, do you want to jump in? Yeah. Hi, everyone. My name is Zach Garland.
I am super jealous that everyone has RStudio Comp Stories. I couldn't make it this year. I do see
that it's supposed to be in Disneyland next year. So I would definitely like to be there. And I'll
probably try my very, very hardest to be there. I feel like it would be like a super fun place
because then you got amusement parks and code and that's all good stuff. But anyways, I work with
the Economics Institute. And so it's very related in ways to things that you focus on. I was curious,
what are some of the most interesting data trends that are new or anomalies that happened after
COVID? Sure. So I should have said this at the beginning, but I'll say it now that these are
all my views and do not reflect the views of my Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis or Federal
Reserve System. But I think definitely one thing that has been very interesting about this time
that makes it sort of different from the maybe 2008 to 2010 financial crisis, which a lot of
people probably remember, was there was just like an unprecedented amount of government support
in this COVID timeframe. Although maybe it didn't always feel like it, it was definitely
more than sort of what came through in the great financial crisis of the late 2000s.
And so I think, you know, there's kind of a debate about, you know, has the financial industry,
how the financial industry sort of maybe benefited from that? Would they have been, you know, in the
same position without that sort of government support, even though it went directly to,
you know, consumers or, you know, individual Americans? You know, a lot of the behavior of
people during that time was, you know, either they had to use it right away, or they had to
put it back in, they just put it back in their deposit account, basically. And so that's
been very interesting. People have referred to the COVID timeframe in some ways as like a
K-shaped recession, where some people really weren't that affected and others were just really
drastically affected. So I think that that kind of mechanic is very interesting. And also
just like the, you know, maybe the co-movement of different macroeconomic variables that had
been observed in maybe more traditional recessions were just not necessarily the same
during this COVID timeframe. So I think, you know, there's a lot of, you know, supply chain issues
that are affecting things and maybe changing the price structures that, you know, we wouldn't have
seen in other kinds of recessions. So for example, people may have noticed like, the used car market
is kind of been sort of insane. I think I could sell my car back to the dealer six years later,
and they would give me maybe more than I paid for it. You know, partially just because supplies
have been so short in nature. But yeah, I think there's just a lot of very different things going
into, you know, how banks are reacting. Certainly there are, you know, some of the government
programs, the banks had to help with the funding and like the PPP program, Paycheck Protection
Program. So that resulted in some interesting data, which I can't say too much specifically
about the data. But yeah, those are maybe some interesting anomalies that I've seen.
Awesome. Thank you.
Thanks, Lindsay. I see Sam asked the question, is your team using Shiny today?
We do use Shiny. So actually, I have a an interesting story about how we started using Shiny.
So I think in about, you know, in 2020, when we're, you know, all working from home, and we're
sort of running, running a crazy amount of stuff, just to better understand, you know, the early
impacts of the COVID pandemic, basically, because our timeframe, when we really run the stress test
is basically April through June. And so, you know, the lockdown period really occurred
essentially in March. And I don't know that any of us really expected it to be what it became. But
we knew that we'd need to maybe do more analysis than normal, given the situation.
And I think a lot of us, you know, there were tools in this case, in Excel, in other,
in other spaces, for these sort of key analytics. And a group of us were just like,
we just can't deal with this. We can't, we can't like make constant updates to these Excel
spreadsheets. And so basically, we got kind of a little bit of white space for a couple weeks.
And I think three or four of us just sat down and said, let's just try to build these things out
as shiny tools. We had, we had some access to deployment in RStudio Connect. And so we're like,
let's just try this out. And also, like, we built out some frameworks using just like HTML
reporting from our markdown. And, you know, we put together what's probably the basis of the set
of analytics that that we still utilize. And so some of those are shiny, some of those are
still in HTML from our markdown files. But, you know, like, I think there was a talk actually in
2020, that inspired me to do the shift things to HTML. And then like that the next step is very
easy to convert something like that to shiny once you sort of have the framework laid out in
our markdown. And so there are, it's actually something we have an intern working on right now,
is to convert some things that are sort of HTML into shiny. So we, we are able to use shiny,
we're not able to convince everyone to use shiny. But then we're not, we're not trying to be too
specific with folks who haven't maybe taken the time to get used to the shiny syntax. So we're
supportive of other tools, Tableau, etc, that people want to use for these sort of analytics.
But I think our team is, especially those who went to our studio are very excited about shiny.
And even, even those that are outside our team, we told them about shiny for Python,
and they're, they're pretty jacked about that, too.
Cool, thank you. I, because you just mentioned your intern working on that shiny app, too,
I see Mike, you had a question, question on interns working there. Do you want to jump in?
Hi, yeah. Nice to see you. I'm Mike Smith at Pfizer. I was just interested to know,
how are you seeing interns at the minute? You know, how are they coming in? What are their
levels of knowledge on Python and R and data science tooling? I, I guess my feeling is that
there would be a whole lot smarter than they were five years ago, or 10 years ago, maybe, or at least
Yeah, so we, we have had some great luck with interns. We, we've had a program in the last
couple years start up in Minneapolis, where we do graduate students, we call it a data science
internship. And their skills have been pretty fantastic. I mean, in some cases, you know,
they're even more cutting edge with, with these R tools, or Python tools than we are ourselves,
as you know, folks who maybe haven't been in school for a little while, or haven't had as much
of the dedicated time to study. So like I said, it, it's been very easy to set them off doing
things like, hey, go build, go work on building the shiny app, or, hey, like, why don't we figure
out how to turn this into a package? Like, let's work out what is the right, you know, what is the
minimum documentation, we want to put in this, and sort of developing, like, how do we actually
build this in the, in the framework that we have, or deploy it in the framework that we have.
So they've been great. And I mean, we, we do, in our interview process, you know, we do have sort
of a code sample, just to make sure that it, you know, does appear that there is some skill in that
area. But we do also, you know, we're pretty open, because like the idea is for them to learn on the
job as well. But I think all of the interns that I've worked with have all had very good R skills.
And I think, at least some Python skills too, we've just been maybe prioritizing the R skills
a little bit more in our, in our pool.
Thanks. That, that seems to mirror what I'm seeing. There's, there's a lot of,
it's almost like the interns could teach us a lot, you know.
Yes. No, we do. We make them do that, actually, too.
There was an anonymous question at the beginning, which actually ties in
to this as well. But when you have people using multiple
programming languages, so R, Python, SAS, how do you structure the work, and who does what?
And how do they work together?
Sure. So I think we have sort of specific tools that we like to use for specific purposes.
So we'll say we use R as probably our main language, but the, the developers that we work
with, they might use any tool. So they might use SAS, or Stata, or MATLAB, or some other tool,
or even R, basically. And so, you know, a lot of us have sort of the multilingual background,
where maybe we weren't coders in SAS, or Stata, or something else, but in the process of helping
to translate that code into sort of a production environment, we definitely learn on the fly,
you know, how to, how to Google the right things for SAS or Stata, or how to interpret, you know,
what things are happening, you know, because sometimes, like, the algorithms aren't the same.
When you have to translate something, you have to kind of determine, you know, how much of that
do you need to dig into versus just say, like, both concepts, conceptually, these are both the
same thing. But SAS does it different than R, something like that. So I think we did have,
you know, team members with some familiarity in those spaces, just for some who've worked in
economics or finance longer, they've definitely not necessarily always been able to use R as their
first language. So, like, at my time, before joining the Fed, I'd used some SAS in my, my first
job in finance. So I had a decent background there, I had a decent background in some MATLAB.
And especially my work in validation, I got to see all of those things, even though I wasn't
necessarily coding in them regularly. So I think we've sort of highlighted that it's useful to be
multilingual. But because that helps you to translate things better, or to, you know,
design them better, maybe than they were in some of those, you know, there are some limitations to
certain languages, there are limitations to R, but, you know, to understand how it how it works
more efficiently, in each language can be helpful in the process. So, but we do, I think we more or
less match people up more based on maybe their financial background versus necessarily their
software background. Just because we're all translating to R, for the most part, and the
Python pieces that we have are a little more general. And so we just have a couple folks on
our team who are a bit more expert in Python, but they still also are expert in R as well.
Thank you. And I just wanted to mention to everyone too, if there's a particular question
you want to like, ask a follow up on, or you want to share insights into as well, feel free to just
raise your hand on, on zoom as well. And then I'll just, I'll just know that you want to jump in.
But I see as well, there was a anonymous question earlier that was,
how does your team think about ethics in your work when it comes to things like race or ethnicity?
Yeah, that's a good question. We, you know, I will say that we thought, maybe I'll separate
ethics from sort of maybe the diversity equity inclusion. You know, one of our main goals,
and especially for me as like a hiring manager is to really thoroughly have, have a pool
every time that we have a posting that meets some specific diversity criteria, but also
maybe meet some diversity criteria of like diversity of thought or diversity of background
versus just maybe like typical metrics. And so that means that our hiring process can sometimes
take a little bit longer. But it also means we don't just hire the first maybe qualified person
that we come across in our pool. And I think internally, once we have people
into the organization, we really want to retain them. And so a lot of the focus
within our organization are to have employee resource networks that cover sort of, you know,
different intersectional parts of our personalities and work lives. So something for women or,
you know, allyship for for a lot of different spaces. And then within my team, it's actually
great, we have a, we sort of do an internal team meeting, where we'll usually discuss,
you know, topics that sort of overlap in this DEI space, a lot of times from a research perspective.
So we've covered things like, I don't know, we looked at like the Iceland four day work week,
they had some studies on that not too long ago, or we look at, you know, what's it been like to go
back to the office, because our company has gone back to sort of a hybrid mode, and what would
make that more effective for us? And how has that changed maybe things in your personal life?
So I think it's always, you know, the goal is that it's just part of the work. And that it's
not like a separate thing. It's not like we're doing DEI now, and then we go back to our day job.
No, it's meant to be integrated with within our day job, just to help, you know, help everyone
realize that these things are always there. We've also had some really fantastic anti racism
training and those kinds of things within our organization. But then I think when it comes to
like approaching the work, like on the, you know, modeling side, definitely we're considering,
you know, what's in the data and what's missing from the data, right? No data is perfect.
You know, we're, we're relying on banks to provide data that we asked them for based on certain
instructions. And so understanding, you know, what's missing from that data is really critical
to thinking about, you know, sort of like, DNI issues. And then, you know, from an ethics
standpoint, more just like the, the Fed has a very high code of ethics. There are some very
specific things that were required to avoid or comply with. And I think definitely some things
about, you know, trading stocks, and even cryptocurrency for some folks are highly
restricted. But I think we do hold ourselves to, you know, as high of a standard as we can even
outside of that sort of ethical code of conduct that we have internally.
Thanks, Lindsay. I see Jonathan had asked in the chat and said just for me to read it out loud.
But it was, what platforms and fun data set projects did you use to learn or enhance your
R programming skills in your free time? Yeah, so I think there was a conference,
maybe that I attended probably like five years ago, a Women in Statistics and Data Science
Conference. And that was like the first place I'd learned about R-Ladies. And I think, you know,
one other person from the Minneapolis area who attended with me, she was really inspired and
decided like, take it on and start up our local chapter again, which had been a little bit defunct
for a while. And I think just going to some of those meetups is where I was really inspired to
learn like the tidyverse. You know, it's very safe space, like it can, I think we had some great
contributors who were able to give good, just really beginner overviews of some of these topics.
And then, you know, we've had pretty consistent, although we've taken a little bit of a summer
break, but pretty consistent talks and always learn something in R-Ladies. So that's been a
really useful way for me to do things. You know, just to use those sort of materials that people
put together in the course of those kinds of meetups. You know, I've also enjoyed just like
the Twitter community around RStats. So I don't always, I feel like I kind of know what's going
on, even if I don't always like dive into something, but like the emergence of this penguins
data set, like in every example, I've been sort of following that recently. And it was even like
a highlight of the sort of OpenScapes Cordo talk, which I thought was very, very cool. And I think
just, you know, trying to immerse myself a little bit more into the community. But, you know, sometimes,
you know, if I just want to learn a package or something like that, I'll just kind of dive into
the page documentation. Usually people put pretty good little data examples. I've also had some good
luck taking, you know, Coursera's that have good kind of R examples as the basis for maybe learning
a new topic. But yeah, it's just great that there's so much free material, you know, the book down
package has made it possible that almost everyone publishes their books now on open source,
basically, if you don't want to get the hard copy. And so I think just, you know, copying and pasting
from Stack Overflow can sometimes be the first step in any good learning data analysis project.
Absolutely. And I shared some upcoming R-Ladies meetups and then R user groups
in the chat as well. When you sort through them like that on meetup, you can see all of them
all over the world. But I also wanted to ask everybody in the chat to on that topic of like,
I know you mentioned the Penguin data set, but does anybody have like certain data sets that you
use for like business examples? Like if you were making the case to your leadership, I've been
looking for just like good play data sets that are like real business example. If you wouldn't
mind sharing those in the chat, that would be awesome. I see there are lots of other questions
from earlier. Let me go up here. Actually, Michael, you had your hand raised. Do you want to jump in?
Sure, I can jump in. Hi, Lindsay. I'm at the data science consulting firm,
Ketchbook Analytics, and we work with a ton of banks and lending institutions. So this is
really right up my alley. I appreciate you coming on here today. My question for you was,
with stress testing in particular, which is an area that we work in quite a bit in developing
those models, having some trouble lately with the sort of new approaches that we have and new tools
that we have for Bayesian modeling that allow us to give more of a probabilistic output, which sort
of feels more like a stress testing-y type place to have those models as opposed to deterministic
models that just say, hey, this is exactly what's going to happen next year. Here's your point
estimate. I've had mixed experience sort of getting buy-in for Bayesian models. I don't know if you
use any Bayesian methods in your work at all, and if so, do you have any words of wisdom for getting
buy-in on those? Yeah, so I would say I don't use any specifically right now, but what I like to say
maybe as a selling point for Bayesian models that maybe people don't think about because a lot of
people are used to frequentists or likelihood or just maybe haven't had a course in Bayesian
approaches, and this is something that my partner told me once, is that Bayesians are just much more
explicit about the assumptions that are present in their models. So sometimes I think we think
we're getting things for free when we fit frequentist-style models or likelihood-based methods,
and people can be uncomfortable with the idea of like, oh, the prior changed and therefore
the output changed, and I think, I actually think like the, you know, credible intervals
being like an actual probability, having an actual probabilistic interpretation is much
stronger than sort of the idea of confidence intervals, but a lot of people just don't,
they don't understand maybe the subtle differences. So I think, you know, what also
people could be afraid of in Bayesian models sometimes is the, you know, how long does it take
to actually run this kind of situation, which I think there are a lot of tools now that, you know,
can allow you to take, you know, much shorter paths to get to an answer, but I would just say that
like it maybe can be great in certain cases, like where you have very little data and you really
have to make an assumption, right? So I like to, I don't know, I think I like to think about like
maybe HR cases where you're trying to determine are we meeting sort of our diversity goals, but
there are only like five people in this group, right? Can we really make a good assessment using
like a frequentist analysis to say like, well, one out of the five people, you know, so we're at 20%,
but in that case, it could be useful to think about like, well, what's a Bayesian approach to
this, which is that like maybe we make some assumption that we're either hitting our criteria
or not hitting our criteria, and then let the data do a little bit of informing of that, you
know, updating of that assumption. You know, I think if you have, you have a huge amount of data,
you know, theory says that the basically the Bayesian approach and the likelihood approach are
essentially the same in those cases. So that's maybe not the case where you'd want to make your
sort of argument, but certainly in the small data cases, or I think there are definitely tools for
different kinds of time series, or I've been reading a little bit about this like Google
time series method that relies on Bayesian stuff, or Bayesian like, you know, model selection
criterions that, you know, there's definitely ways to make arguments about perhaps how much better
those methods do just from a prediction performance. So maybe it's more too about like what
are the metrics people really care about, and can you hit those better with the Bayesian model than
perhaps like a frequentist model? Awesome, I appreciate it. Thank you. Do you have any
recommendations of what doesn't work? Shiny has helped quite a bit, you know, building a
Shiny app that shows those probabilistic simulations. Teaching people what a histogram is, is a good
place to start for me, and that's, you know, most of the population does not know what a histogram is,
even a lot of people that I work with in risk management, which is interesting. But yeah, no,
I would say that the places you made great points about when it might be appropriate and when it not,
when it isn't appropriate, and obviously if you have plenty of data, you know, you shouldn't need
to employ a Bayesian model, but we see some portions of credit portfolios, some segments of
those portfolios that have never had a default event. So if someone's trying to predict probability
of default, take a frequentist approach, it's going to be zero, but there's not, there's not
really a zero percent chance that, you know, no loan in that segment of the portfolio will ever
default. So that's, that's sort of where I think priors can help quite a bit. Definitely.
Thanks, Michael. Brian, I see you have your hand raised, and I think it might be for this topic too.
You want to jump in? Yeah, sure. So there is a whole new world coming out for stress testing
called SESSL, which is a probabilistic method. So right now it's semi-deterministic where
they come up with scenarios and you have to model out, okay, inflation goes to this,
unemployment goes to that, blah, blah, blah, model your portfolio, spit it out.
I worked on Solvency 2, which is an European version of it, far more, I'll say far more
sophisticated events because it's a hundred percent stochastic. So in the insurance industry,
it's all Bayesian type. You say our portfolio of losses is a log normal distribution with these
parameters. Here is the fit that proves it out. And then you begin to do all sorts of
stochastic sampling and everything else. I also worked in the area of natural catastrophe risk,
where you're looking at a magnitude nine earthquake hasn't happened yet, but we know
it will. And what is the probability of it? And what does that distribution look like?
And you get into extreme value theory. So short answer, it's coming down the
pike for banking because of the switching framework. Insurance industry has been doing it
10 to 15 years. You could almost say 20, if you go back to the early days of the UK,
when I worked over there. So lots of opportunity, lots of opportunity to harness something like the
power of R, where you can generate hundreds of thousands of simulations in seconds versus,
I'll say 20 years ago, people were doing that in Excel. And they're lucky if they got through it.
Thanks, Ryan. Let me jump over to Mike. I see you asked a question around packages
and Federica, you also asked about what packages are used. So Lindsay would love to hear what are
some of your favorite packages that are used. And Mike asked specifically, how do you utilize the
FredR package? Yeah, so favorite packages. So I said this in a Twitter thread, so I'll repeat it
here. Stats, obviously, we're part of the stats as part of the base load of R, very important.
But kidding aside, so dplyr, very important for, you know, I think a lot of the work we're doing
is data processing to get, you know, before we get to the modeling part. So dplyr, you know,
still work a lot, you know, visualization, ggplot2, and then sometimes adding plotly to ggplot2 or
I've tried out a little bit with high charter, which is pretty neat as well for sort of the
interactive visualization. I don't know where it's gone, but I think it's still out there,
the dtplyr package, I really liked as a having sort of the interface dplyr kind of interface
to the data table package, because I have a hard time with the data table syntax just on my own.
But I liked having that interface and have used that before as well, just to make handling some
of the big data a little bit easier. Let's see what other common ones. Well, certainly,
Shiny and R Markdown for some of the reporting tools.
See if there's anything new and fancy that I've tried out. I mean, I think after the RStudio
conference, everyone really wants to try out Cordo. We're trying to get some installs of the
newer version of RStudio to try some of that stuff out. You know, it's a little bit challenging
sometimes when you don't have admin rights to your computer to do some of these things,
but I think a lot of us have downloaded on our home computer and tried them out.
Yeah, I would say those are sort of boring answers, and I don't have anything maybe
revolutionary, because probably a lot of people on this call use some of those similar packages
for their everyday life. But I mean, dplyr is just sort of game changing. You know, I don't
really know SQL very well, because I just select all and then do the processing in R, basically,
when I have access to a package like dplyr. So that's been really helpful.
Awesome. Thank you. There was a question.
Sorry, I didn't answer the second part. Sorry. Somebody asked about Fred. So Fred is this big
open source data endeavor by Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, but is a very common source
for a lot of economics data. They do have like an API, and I think there are actually multiple
R packages that can connect to that. Some of it is a little bit weird. You kind of have to have
these string IDs that connect you to a certain data series. But I've used, I haven't used Fred
too much in work, but I've used it as sort of like presentation example. So Fred R has like
a reasonable interface to get data from Fred. Then there are just thousands of economic time series
on that page, you know, multiple measures of inflation or unemployment rate or like all of
the common ones that you might be interested in sort of matching up with perhaps other kinds of
data. So that's a very comprehensive set of data. I assume the Bureau of Labor Statistics may have
something similar, but I have not. I'm guessing there might be a BLS R kind of package somewhere
floating out there, but I haven't tried that. But I think those are maybe two good sources for like
government style statistics. Great. Thank you. Yeah. And if other
people have packages to share, feel free to put them in the chat too. Oh, thanks Ben. I think that's
the BLS package. Perfect. There is a question earlier and I might need help with some of the
acronyms here, but it is for Monte Carlo based simulation for VAR slash stress testing.
Do you predominantly use STAN or also use newer PPL, which I just asked is probabilistic
programming language tools for your production grade code? So I can read that again.
Or you got it? Yeah, yeah, I got it. I think the VAR here is probably meaning value at risk.
So I would say we, you know, I probably can't get into too much detail, but you know, we
we use R if we need to do a simulation, we code that up appropriately. So I said, we don't really
use Bayesian models at this point. But like I said, I can share the link to essentially our
methodology document, which tells you a little bit about, you know, the functional forms that are in
the models that are done. But, you know, as people sort of noted, like their estimation components,
and then the scenario component is essentially deterministic in that there is a specific
scenario that runs through the model and produces a set of sort of projections over a certain horizon.
So yeah, I don't, I don't know what the PPL tools are. So I would be interested to know,
if anyone wants to volunteer, like what those tools might look like.
Any takers?
Feel free to put in the chat too. Yeah, Robert would love to explain it.
Um, let's see. So I know we're getting to the top of the hour, I want to make sure I haven't missed
questions in here. I see June, you had asked a question with a little star next to it. So I'll
read it. Could you tell us what are the key variables that banks report for your stress assessment?
Sure. So there are, again, this is public information, so I'm not giving away any
secrets. There are instructions that we put out to the world, although I don't know that many
people would read them outside of bankers, or maybe consultants that work with bankers.
They're, they're a long read that, so it covers just a number of characteristics about their
portfolio. So for stress testing, specifically, there are some data sets that are required on a
monthly basis. So those are like loan level portfolios. So you can think of like credit
card portfolio or mortgage portfolio. There's data that's required quarterly. So that includes,
you know, a lot of other information, information on their trading book, or, you know,
trading book, or counterparties, or something called operational risk losses, and also things
like wholesale losses, or wholesale portfolios. And then there's annual data that is really
specific for the stress test that's run annually. So information about like their capital planning,
you know, how they plan to distribute things. So that data is all very confidential. However,
if you're really interested in knowing more about sort of the banking portfolios, there is a data
set that's widely used and is very, very good. It's called the FRY9C, which doesn't mean a lot
without context, but it essentially has like high level information quarterly about the bank's
operations. So their revenues, their balances, you know, sort of their expenses, all of those kinds
of things. Actually, if you looked at like, like a quarterly earnings page for a bank, you would
probably find a link to their Y9C submission, because that is public information. I don't know
if anyone has built an API, definitely there are sites that have PDFs or Excel documents of these,
these things, but I can send a link to the, or I'll just type that it's called the FRY9C in the
chat in case any of you want to look it up. It can be a very good sort of top down way to look at,
you know, maybe the differences and better understand like where different kinds of banks
are, are making their markets. Great, thank you. I just want to say if there's a lot of questions,
so if anybody has a question that wasn't asked yet, and you want to raise your hand on Zoom so
that I know I can call on you next, but one that was asked earlier is something that comes up a lot
is the benefit of advanced education, the PhDs in industry. Do you feel it was beneficial to go back
to grad school? It was beneficial, but not in the way that I had intended it to be, which like I said
at the very beginning, my thought was I want to be a professor, and this is the only way to do that.
I think there are probably other ways I could have gotten to this stage in my career, and I would
say definitely going to grad school is not recommended for the faint of heart, or it's not
like a thing to do when you don't know what to do, because you definitely should be, be confident that
you, you want to do it, but I think sometimes like the, the things that have really benefited me from
especially doing a PhD are, you know, learning how to think, learning how to connect like really
high-level concepts, like I don't know every tool in the sort of econometrics toolkit,
but having learned some very general ways to think about modeling and statistics helped me
zoom in much quicker when I need to learn those kinds of things, and I think just, you know, there's
a lot of opportunities to talk about research both in a very technical way, but then also in a pretty
non-technical way, and working on like your presentation skills in that way. I will say like
I didn't learn that much about being a manager or being a leader in grad school, and those are
things that I've had to rely on other life experiences to teach me and, and work on directly,
so I just want to, you know, not give that implication that if you go get a PhD you become a
manager. Definitely those are sort of separate skill sets for the most part, but you know, working
in, in working in real life kind of outside of grad school, I think a lot of the skills have been
transferable, just learning how to solve problems in general is, is a skill that's very transferable,
and I think sometimes maybe I have too much of a logical view of the world, like because of, you
know, grad school or luckily I have a very nerdy partner and we can exchange statistics jokes or
talk about probability spaces with measure zero and understand what we're, what each of us means,
but yeah, I mean, I think, I think I wouldn't, I wouldn't have not done it in sort of the
counterfactual case, but there are multiple ways to get, you know, to achieve this path and,
you know, not even going to grad school works for some, for a lot of people,
just because of all the tools we have available.
Super helpful, thank you. I know we just hit the top of the hour, so if you have to run to a meeting,
I don't want to hold you from that. Do you have time for one more question? One more question is
fine, yep. Okay, Javier, I see you had a follow-up question to the Bayesian conversation, do you want
to jump in? Yeah, thanks, and I joined late, so apologies if you already covered this, Lindsay,
but I used to work with a lot of, like, PhD statisticians and actuaries that were very fond
of sort of the core stand packages for Bayesian modeling, and I know that over the last few years,
tidy models has really kind of, you know, allowed you to tap into those engines and whatnot.
I'm just curious if, in practice, you have kind of, you know, started to take on more of the tidy
models approach, tapping into those Bayesian engines and algos, or if you're still using sort
of the, you know, core standalone framework, like RSTAN or RSTAN-ARM, or something like that?
Yeah, so we don't have, like, Bayesian frameworks in the space that I'm in. I think people, though,
are learning about tidy models and how we can apply those. I think, certainly, people were
inspired by the, you know, the idea of, like, recipes and those kinds of things that come with
kind of the tidy models framework, but right now, I mean, I think I've used RSTAN a little bit in my,
maybe, dissertation work, but have not, and would be very interested to know that there are,
I am interested to know that there are newer, better frameworks than RSTAN,
better frameworks than sort of the old stuff, because it is definitely an intellectual curiosity
for me, as well, to work in that, like, new, like, RSTAN framework. I don't know if my professors
would be okay with it, but, no, sometimes they're a little bit purist on the MCMC methods, but,
versus the STAN method, but some of us have to get the work done in a timely fashion,
so appreciate you bringing it up. Thank you.
Awesome. Well, thank you so much, Lindsay, for joining us today. I don't want to keep you too long
over. I really appreciate your time and sharing your insights with us. If people do want to hang
out, we'll be here just hanging out and staying on for a little bit longer, but thank you so much, Lindsay.
I think Lindsay had to drop right away, but she shared earlier that the best way to
stay in touch is through LinkedIn, so I shared Lindsay's LinkedIn through the chat, as well.
But any other general questions? Hey, Lisa. Thank you. But if anyone has other general questions
for the group, and you want to stay on and hang out for a few more minutes, feel free to
to ask them or raise your hand. I know there were a few that I may have missed, unfortunately.
I see, Marcos, you have your hand raised. Do you want to jump in?
Yeah, my first time here, it was really cool hearing. I didn't know anything about Bayesian
modeling or much about stress testing and financial stuff, but it was still really cool.
But I'm just curious, like, since this feels like a really R-centric group, I'm just curious, like,
show of hands, or I guess you can't do a show of hands. Show of something in the chat, like,
in terms of, like, I started with R. I taught myself Shiny. I did a bunch of R stuff, but then my job,
when I finally became a data scientist, was all Python. So I'm just curious, like,
what the mix is of the Hangout. Like, do we feel like we're 80% R? Like, 50-50? Like,
people use both? Just curious what the tool breakdown is. But regardless.
Great question.
And this is a point I make to some colleagues. I was virtually attended the R conference, and
all the R people seem really cool. So even though I'm a Python person, like,
I want to be friends with all of you, so.
I love it. Yeah, that's a great question.
Want to use the chat window? Or people, feel free to jump in, too.
Sounds like a lot of Python curious are 50-50.
And Marcos, thanks for joining. Welcome. Did you find out about the conference?
Your talk. Because I watched your talk at RStudio, and I thought there's a data science
Hangout. Actually, I might have been in the Discord. I was like, what's a data science Hangout?
I think it was the Discord for your talk.
That's great. Thank you. Thanks for coming to my talk.
I think one of my colleagues might join at some point. Another data scientist over at
Carmex might come. I share the word at work as well.
That's great. Thank you. If anybody wants to share it with colleagues,
I just put the short link to add it to your calendar, too.
Thank you all so much for joining. Any other general questions for the group?
Or does anyone want to jump in and give some feedback to Marcos as well?
Marcos, a question, actually. I'm just curious. Marcos, when you're, well, in your specific role,
or your team's function, are you all working more on back-end type work, or are you regularly
teaming with stakeholders and communicating data insights and dashboards or something like that?
The data flows up, but usually not directly. I work in pricing systems, so we're on the team that
go to carmex.com and slash sell your car. You're going to get an offer on your car.
No surprise. There's algorithms behind that. That's what my team does.
So, it's mostly, it is integrated in terms of some productionization and actual machine learning,
but we're not really building a lot. There are people on my team that do reports on profitability
or whatever, but that's not really my function. I focus more on the algorithms and the systems,
but happy to touch base if you want to learn more. Thanks.
Thanks. Well, thank you all so much for joining. I don't want anyone to feel like you have to stay
around if you're getting ready to leave, but if you do want to stay around and hang out,
feel free to just keep jumping in and asking questions or connecting with each other,
but thank you all so much for joining. Thanks, Rachel.
Brian said he's happy to answer any stress-testing questions,
so we'll put you on the spot, Brian.
Sure. I was a professional model validator independently in the UK for stress testing, so
if anybody has any questions on that, I wrote papers and documents to push back against the
Central Bank of England and the Central Bank of Ireland, who were regulators at the time, so
and studied a lot of the banking CCAR. It's not that different.
I'm trying to double-check if there were any questions on that that I missed from earlier, too.
Did everyone else know it was dplyr? Because I totally
been saying Dipler my whole life, like I had no idea it was dplyr. Does everyone else know that?
It took me a little while. I learned R, and then I met Python people,
and I never talked to any other R people who used dplyr.
You know, the reason I knew is because there's a hex sticker for it, and it looks like little
pliers, so then that's how you remember it.
Yeah, that makes total sense. I mean, it's a much better way to pronounce it, just, you know.
Then there's, yeah, there's a dbplyr, dplyr, yeah.
Awesome. Well, thank you all for joining. Doesn't seem like there's other questions, but
so nice to see you all again. We will be back here same time, same place next week, too.
We'll be joined by Adam Bly, who is CEO and founder of System.
And if you want to see the upcoming speaker list, it's on the RStudio Data Science Hangout website,
too, which I just put there in the chat again. So, thanks all. Have a great rest of the day.